Google Cloud Platform/README.md, before:

# Google Cloud Platform

This section deals with GCP as a Cloud Provider and explores all its features required for a Cloud Engineer as well as with regards to DevOps.<br />
GCP is a platform that encompasses a lot of Google products that is involved in the mainstream Google services. It powers Chrome, Google devices, Maps, Analytics, GMail, Search as well as Workspace. <br />
Google, as of writing has around 160 points of presence that is currently being maintained and expanded.


## Solution Continuum

It is important to realise that there exists more than one solution for a particular problem in the Cloud. An app that may be deployed using *App Engine* might also be deployed using just the *Compute Engine*.<br />
For example, we might employ granularity using *GKE*s, bare metal access to hardware to do the same task that might be done using Serverless or Autoscaling, which is very abstract. So, the same task that can be done using a *Compute Engine* by installing MySQL and starting up the database on it can also be done by creating a Cloud SQL instance.



## Contents:

1. **Google Cloud Fundamentals - Core Infrastructure**: This contains materials relating to a Coursera course for understanding the platform and the services that it offers. This is an introductory level course and the first in its series.
    - Offers a brief overview of all services.
    - Special mention to the Storage services, which are explained in great detail.
    - Services discussed **properly**: *Cloud SQL*, *Cloud Storage*, *Cloud Spanner*, *Firestore*, *Bigtable*, *App Engine* & *Cloud Functions*.
1. **Essential Google Cloud Infrastructure - Foundation**: This contains materials regarding the core infrastructure - the underlying basic framework that powers the complex systems. This is an introductory level course and the second in its series.
    - Offers special insight into the Networking and Compute services.
    - Services discussed: *Cloud NAT*, *Cloud DNS*, *VPC Networks*, *Cloud Shell*, *Cloud Console* & *Compute Engine*.

Commit message:

Started with GCP CDL preparatory materials

Google Cloud Platform/README.md, after:

# Google Cloud Platform

This section deals with GCP as a Cloud Provider and explores all its features required for a Cloud Engineer as well as with regards to DevOps.<br />
GCP is a platform that encompasses a lot of Google products that is involved in the mainstream Google services. It powers Chrome, Google devices, Maps, Analytics, GMail, Search as well as Workspace. <br />
Google, as of writing has around 160 points of presence that is currently being maintained and expanded.


## Solution Continuum

It is important to realise that there exists more than one solution for a particular problem in the Cloud. An app that may be deployed using *App Engine* might also be deployed using just the *Compute Engine*.<br />
For example, we might employ granularity using *GKE*s, bare metal access to hardware to do the same task that might be done using Serverless or Autoscaling, which is very abstract. So, the same task that can be done using a *Compute Engine* by installing MySQL and starting up the database on it can also be done by creating a Cloud SQL instance.



## Coursera Courses:

1. **Google Cloud Fundamentals - Core Infrastructure**: This contains materials relating to a Coursera course for understanding the platform and the services that it offers. This is an introductory level course and the first in its series.
    - Offers a brief overview of all services.
    - Special mention to the Storage services, which are explained in great detail.
    - Services discussed **properly**: *Cloud SQL*, *Cloud Storage*, *Cloud Spanner*, *Firestore*, *Bigtable*, *App Engine* & *Cloud Functions*.
1. **Essential Google Cloud Infrastructure - Foundation**: This contains materials regarding the core infrastructure - the underlying basic framework that powers the complex systems. This is an introductory level course and the second in its series.
    - Offers special insight into the Networking and Compute services.
    - Services discussed: *Cloud NAT*, *Cloud DNS*, *VPC Networks*, *Cloud Shell*, *Cloud Console* & *Compute Engine*.


## Beyond the Courses

1. **Commands**: This directory has the explanation of mostly used commands so that it may serve as a point of reference while working in Cloud.
1. **Cloud Digital Leader Certification Preparation**: This directory has the materials relevant for passing the GCP CDL certification.
