Linux/os-theory.md, before:

# Operating System Theory

Here, we discuss the important concepts behind an Operating System's functioning.


## Redundant Array of Inexpensive/ Independent Disks (RAID)

- We build our storage with redundancy (duplication of critical functions), so that one part of failure in the disk doesn't bring down the whole system. Reads and writes are spread out over more than a disk. Our data exists in more than one place.
- RAID is not backup. A backup is a failsafe when a system is corrupted. However, here, if a system gets corrupted, the mirrored RAID gives us two copies of corrupted systems. RAID works with replication, which may be by mirroring or parity.
- We have levels in RAID, which aren't representative of the disks that are being used.
    - **RAID 0**
        - It has 0 redundancy.
        - Data is **written across the drives** (data is *striped*).
        -Data can potentially be read from more than one drive concurrently. This is a major performance boost. That's all it is useful for; not long-term data storage.
    - **RAID 1**
        - It has redundancy.
        - Data written to a drive is *mirrored* to its paired drive. Every drive exists with a pair to be written to.
        - Everytime data is written to a RAID1 device, it goes to both drives. This is why write performance is slower, but reads are faster.
    - **RAID 10**
        - Both RAID1 and RAID 0 are combined.
        - We create a RAID 10 device with 4 disks: 1 pair for RAID 0 & 1 for RAID 1.
        - RAID 1's redundancy + RAID 0's performance.
    - **RAID 5**
        - Works on the principle of parity data.
        - Needs at least 3 equal size disks drives to function. They must be identical for this to work. Complete copies of data aren't stored in the drives. They're broken into parity data to be stored.
        - If one data drive dies, *system can be rebuilt with no data loss*. If more drives die, we have to resort to backup. This is a nice feature.
    - **RAID 6**
        - Similar to RAID 5, but sets aside 2 parity disks.
        - This means, it can recover from 2 failed disk drives.


## Power On Self Test

- This is a set of routines that are to be executed by the firmware after the computer is powered on to determine if the hardware is working as expected. If not, BIOS issues an error message.
- When power button is pressed, it sends power to the boot-loader in the cache memory. The Boot loader performs POST as a preboot sequence. If everything is working well without any errors the BIOS (Basic Input Output System) is activated which finds and loads the operating system.
- The principal duties of the BIOS during POST are:
    - Find, size, and verify the system main memory.
    - Initialize BIOS.
    - Identify, organize, and select which devices are available for booting.
    - Verify CPU registers.
    - Verify the integrity of the BIOS code itself.
    - Verify some basic components like DMA, timer, interrupt controller.
    - Pass control to other specialized extensions BIOS (if installed).
- The POST does a lot of things - **loading the kernel is not one of those**.
- Fundamentally, it has everything to do with the BIOS, checking of hardware health, registers, etc.
- Checks are performed majorly on hardware, keyboard, other peripheral devices, CPU registers, timer, interrupt controller, DMA, etc.
- Errors commonly are:
    - Unstable processors.
    - Incompatible RAM types.
    - No good banks.
    - No detectable RAM.
    - No good boot images.


## Basic Input/Output System (BIOS)


## Processes

- A program when in execution is a process. However, a program is more than the program source code. A process is an active entity that contains various additional components other than the program source code.
- A process contains a process stack to store the temporary data such as function parameters, local variables, etc, a data section to store global variables, a heap memory allocated dynamically at runtime.
- A **Process Control Block** represents a process in the operating system. A process control block contains various information related to a process such as a process state, program counter, CPU register details, memory management information, etc. It acts as a repository that contains all details that belong to the process.
- A process may have *five* states: New, Ready, Running, Waiting & Terminated.
    - When a new process is admitted, it becomes ready.
    - When a process that is ready undergoes scheduler dispatch (gets a go signal by scheduler), it starts running.
    - When a running process is finished execution, it is terminated.
    - When a running process comes across an interrupt, it transitions back to ready state.
    - When an event occurs, the running process undergoes an event wait until the event is done, after which it transitions back to ready state.
- There are two types of processes:
    - **Coordinating Processes**: These processes are employed to work in conjunction with other processes to achieve some task(s) by sharing of resources. It can affect or be affected by other system processes.
    - **Independent Processes**: No scope for sharing of any data among other processes. It can neither affect nor be affected by others. It serves one task by itself.


## Threads




## Synchronous Operations

- There can be multiple types of operations happening in a machine. They can be related to a particular service or software running, or a lightweight or a heavyweight system operation going on.
- Synchronosity means pre-ordainment and a predefined lifecycle that is strictly bound. It means that one task has to be done after another, and another. That particular route has to be followed compulsorily. A process might be waiting for the disk to read and send it data, but while the disk does its operation, all it can do is wait. Nothing else.
- Hence, when a process is synchronous, it is tightly bound and cannot do any other work unless the process completes. Hence, CPU cycles are wasted with the process thread doing literally nothing.
- There is only one thread in a process doing all the work.
- This is the default behaviour of most old hardware. These days, a lot of optimizations can be done within a process to make optimum use of CPU.


## Asynchronous Operations

- The thread in synchronous systems that was properly scheduled to adhere to flow of process sends a request to the system stating that it would go on and do some other work while the process executes and is handed off to some resource (like a disk for reading, a printer to literally print, etc.). Once that operation by the device is done, a function call should happen that would bring the thread back. So, to bring the thread back, there are always *callback functions*.
- They are always single-threaded.
- One of the most elegant systems implementing this example is NojeJS - which is a single-threaded, non-blocking asynchronous framework.
- The largest disadvantage of this method is that there are way too many callbacks that need to be designed for every task that the thread may branch off to do. Coding that would be ugly as well.
- A fix was implemented by introducing async and await concepts. That made code that was asynchronous look synchronous with a bit of a syntactical sugar.


## Multithreaded Operations

- A thread is a lightweight process that lives within a space having access to all system resources, codes and files. It originates from a place known as the thread-pool from where, upon demand, threads can be spun up and used to do concurrent work.
- This means, there are many threads in a process to do a task. Obviously, we have speed gains here.
- We need to, however, take care of concurrency issues that may arise due to all threads having access to the same low-level system resources and files. We might run into situations where a certain element of a resource in the system is being attempted to be altered by two or more threads. That is risky.
- Thread safety is the state of a system where it runs no risk of having problems with respect to thread concurrency or many threads trying to alter the same resource. While this is possible in theory, programming such a situation where thread saftely is guaranteed 100% of the time is not easy and is not always possible. This is why many engineers dislike multithreaded systems since its problems outweight the potential advantage it offers.
- We have many mechanisms like mutex locks, etc. to ensure thread safety, which would be explored later.


## Multiprocessing Operations

- Instead of dealing with all the mess of making a thread asynchronous or having multiple threads in the first place, here we have everything as a well-defined, singular process.
- Each huge process, to speed it up, executes as multiple processes. they communicate via *inter-process communication*.
- The best thing about such a process is that a process can be made into a multi-process architecture and, to speed up to the extreme limits, can even be scaled across different systems.


## Inter-Process Communication

- In modern computing, we often have more than one processes work together to accomplish a single task (or we have multiple tasks being serviced by a single process). Hence arises the need for multiple processes to communicate with each other (if they are working together for a common objective). This is Inter-Process Communication (IPC).
- As inferred by definition, it works for coordinating processes.
- We need IPCs for:
    - Faster computing.
    - Modularity.
    - Information Sharing.
- There are two modes of IPC:
    - **Shared Memory**:
        - The idea is that there would exist a certain area in memory for sharing between interested processes.
        - Generally, the OS doesn't allow sharing of memory between processes. This is to avoid race conditions. So, that restriction needs to be removed for it to work.
        - The process that initiates the communication allots the shared memory space. Other processes who want to join in attach their address spaces for sharing.
        - Since there is always a possibility that both processes might make writes to the shared location at the same time, hence the shared memory is not safe. We employ techniques of synchronization just to avoid this. We do that in ways of *semaphores* and *mutex*.
    - **Message Passing**:
        - The idea of shared memory may not always be possible (safety aside). In distributed systems, there may not be any place for that.
        - Here, processes communicate with each other by means of message passing.
        - If two processes are communicating (say A and B), the common channel is the kernel. For example, A writes to the disk a bit of info. It has to tell it to the kernel so that B can make a succesful read of that from the disk (by retrieving that info from kernel itself).
        - There are several techniques of message passing. We have **direct communication** in which messages are directly sent at once rather than any intermediate queues or buffers. **Indirect communcation** uses a mailbox facility for storing the stream of messages. We can also add an aditional mode of **synchronization** in which ther messages that would pass through and won't are evaluated for decisions and are synced. We can also use **buffered communication** with an intermediary buffer.


## Mutex

- In shared memory IPCs, we have two synchronization mechanisms - mutex and semaphores.
- The *critical section* problem states that assuming a system has *n* processes running, each process has a segment of code in which they do a common variable update. This would obviously lead to unexpected race conditions. This critical section problem is what we seek to solve using mutex and semaphores. This is the only risk we have in shared memory IPCs.
- There are certain characteristics of a critical section:
    - Once a process executes its critical section, no other process is allowed to do so. This is to ensure atomic consistency of data. This is called *mutual exclusion*.
    - There should be a *bounded wait* on for a process when it has requested for its critical section entry section and the number of times another process executes its critical section.
    - The part of the code that grants permission for entry into a critical section is called an *entry section*. The code after the critical section is *exit section*.
- A mutex is basically a lock. A process acquires a mutex lock when it executes its critical section and leaves it when it is done. A process trying to access a critical section gets blocked off until the lock is relinquished.
- A mutex lock has a boolean variable (say *available*) that gauges if the critical section is available or not. It has two functionalities - **acquire** and **release** that each process can use to signal that universal *available* variable.
- The greatest con to this problem is the **thread spinlock** or the **thread busy-waiting** problem. When a critical section is occupied, other threads are stuck in a loop constantly checking for the lock to be released. They are wasting their CPU cycles doing nothing. This makes threads totally pointless.
- The greatest pro of this is that there is no need for context-switching (switching the context from one process to another with respect to the process execution) which is a resource-intensive operation.


## Semaphore

- Semaphores offer the utility that mutex offers but it does so in a more sophesticated way.
- They don't have boolean variables, but integer variables. They keep a count of the process. That variable is mutually exclusive in access and hence atomic. There are two operations: **wait** and **signal**.
- Binary semaphores can only acquire 0 and 1 as values. A binary semaphore has the same functionality as a mutex lock. Systems that do not support mutex locks can leverage binary semaphores to achieve the same functionality.
- Counting semaphores range up to infinite numbers from 0. Every process is assigned a count of 1. If it is executing on the same resource, the count goes up. When it is done, the count falls.
- An advantage that it has over mutex is that multiple threads of a process can access the same semaphore simultaneously.


## Interrupts

## Context Switches

Commit message:

Start system calls in Linux

Linux/os-theory.md, after:

# Operating System Theory

Here, we discuss the important concepts behind an Operating System's functioning.


## Redundant Array of Inexpensive/ Independent Disks (RAID)

- We build our storage with redundancy (duplication of critical functions), so that one part of failure in the disk doesn't bring down the whole system. Reads and writes are spread out over more than a disk. Our data exists in more than one place.
- RAID is not backup. A backup is a failsafe when a system is corrupted. However, here, if a system gets corrupted, the mirrored RAID gives us two copies of corrupted systems. RAID works with replication, which may be by mirroring or parity.
- We have levels in RAID, which aren't representative of the disks that are being used.
    - **RAID 0**
        - It has 0 redundancy.
        - Data is **written across the drives** (data is *striped*).
        -Data can potentially be read from more than one drive concurrently. This is a major performance boost. That's all it is useful for; not long-term data storage.
    - **RAID 1**
        - It has redundancy.
        - Data written to a drive is *mirrored* to its paired drive. Every drive exists with a pair to be written to.
        - Everytime data is written to a RAID1 device, it goes to both drives. This is why write performance is slower, but reads are faster.
    - **RAID 10**
        - Both RAID1 and RAID 0 are combined.
        - We create a RAID 10 device with 4 disks: 1 pair for RAID 0 & 1 for RAID 1.
        - RAID 1's redundancy + RAID 0's performance.
    - **RAID 5**
        - Works on the principle of parity data.
        - Needs at least 3 equal size disks drives to function. They must be identical for this to work. Complete copies of data aren't stored in the drives. They're broken into parity data to be stored.
        - If one data drive dies, *system can be rebuilt with no data loss*. If more drives die, we have to resort to backup. This is a nice feature.
    - **RAID 6**
        - Similar to RAID 5, but sets aside 2 parity disks.
        - This means, it can recover from 2 failed disk drives.


## Power On Self Test

- This is a set of routines that are to be executed by the firmware after the computer is powered on to determine if the hardware is working as expected. If not, BIOS issues an error message.
- When power button is pressed, it sends power to the boot-loader in the cache memory. The Boot loader performs POST as a preboot sequence. If everything is working well without any errors the BIOS (Basic Input Output System) is activated which finds and loads the operating system.
- The principal duties of the BIOS during POST are:
    - Find, size, and verify the system main memory.
    - Initialize BIOS.
    - Identify, organize, and select which devices are available for booting.
    - Verify CPU registers.
    - Verify the integrity of the BIOS code itself.
    - Verify some basic components like DMA, timer, interrupt controller.
    - Pass control to other specialized extensions BIOS (if installed).
- The POST does a lot of things - **loading the kernel is not one of those**.
- Fundamentally, it has everything to do with the BIOS, checking of hardware health, registers, etc.
- Checks are performed majorly on hardware, keyboard, other peripheral devices, CPU registers, timer, interrupt controller, DMA, etc.
- Errors commonly are:
    - Unstable processors.
    - Incompatible RAM types.
    - No good banks.
    - No detectable RAM.
    - No good boot images.


## Basic Input/Output System (BIOS)


## Processes

- A program when in execution is a process. However, a program is more than the program source code. A process is an active entity that contains various additional components other than the program source code.
- A process contains a process stack to store the temporary data such as function parameters, local variables, etc, a data section to store global variables, a heap memory allocated dynamically at runtime.
- A **Process Control Block** represents a process in the operating system. A process control block contains various information related to a process such as a process state, program counter, CPU register details, memory management information, etc. It acts as a repository that contains all details that belong to the process.
- A process may have *five* states: New, Ready, Running, Waiting & Terminated.
    - When a new process is admitted, it becomes ready.
    - When a process that is ready undergoes scheduler dispatch (gets a go signal by scheduler), it starts running.
    - When a running process is finished execution, it is terminated.
    - When a running process comes across an interrupt, it transitions back to ready state.
    - When an event occurs, the running process undergoes an event wait until the event is done, after which it transitions back to ready state.
- There are two types of processes:
    - **Coordinating Processes**: These processes are employed to work in conjunction with other processes to achieve some task(s) by sharing of resources. It can affect or be affected by other system processes.
    - **Independent Processes**: No scope for sharing of any data among other processes. It can neither affect nor be affected by others. It serves one task by itself.


## Threads




## Synchronous Operations

- There can be multiple types of operations happening in a machine. They can be related to a particular service or software running, or a lightweight or a heavyweight system operation going on.
- Synchronosity means pre-ordainment and a predefined lifecycle that is strictly bound. It means that one task has to be done after another, and another. That particular route has to be followed compulsorily. A process might be waiting for the disk to read and send it data, but while the disk does its operation, all it can do is wait. Nothing else.
- Hence, when a process is synchronous, it is tightly bound and cannot do any other work unless the process completes. Hence, CPU cycles are wasted with the process thread doing literally nothing.
- There is only one thread in a process doing all the work.
- This is the default behaviour of most old hardware. These days, a lot of optimizations can be done within a process to make optimum use of CPU.


## Asynchronous Operations

- The thread in synchronous systems that was properly scheduled to adhere to flow of process sends a request to the system stating that it would go on and do some other work while the process executes and is handed off to some resource (like a disk for reading, a printer to literally print, etc.). Once that operation by the device is done, a function call should happen that would bring the thread back. So, to bring the thread back, there are always *callback functions*.
- They are always single-threaded.
- One of the most elegant systems implementing this example is NojeJS - which is a single-threaded, non-blocking asynchronous framework.
- The largest disadvantage of this method is that there are way too many callbacks that need to be designed for every task that the thread may branch off to do. Coding that would be ugly as well.
- A fix was implemented by introducing async and await concepts. That made code that was asynchronous look synchronous with a bit of a syntactical sugar.


## Multithreaded Operations

- A thread is a lightweight process that lives within a space having access to all system resources, codes and files. It originates from a place known as the thread-pool from where, upon demand, threads can be spun up and used to do concurrent work.
- This means, there are many threads in a process to do a task. Obviously, we have speed gains here.
- We need to, however, take care of concurrency issues that may arise due to all threads having access to the same low-level system resources and files. We might run into situations where a certain element of a resource in the system is being attempted to be altered by two or more threads. That is risky.
- Thread safety is the state of a system where it runs no risk of having problems with respect to thread concurrency or many threads trying to alter the same resource. While this is possible in theory, programming such a situation where thread saftely is guaranteed 100% of the time is not easy and is not always possible. This is why many engineers dislike multithreaded systems since its problems outweight the potential advantage it offers.
- We have many mechanisms like mutex locks, etc. to ensure thread safety, which would be explored later.


## Multiprocessing Operations

- Instead of dealing with all the mess of making a thread asynchronous or having multiple threads in the first place, here we have everything as a well-defined, singular process.
- Each huge process, to speed it up, executes as multiple processes. they communicate via *inter-process communication*.
- The best thing about such a process is that a process can be made into a multi-process architecture and, to speed up to the extreme limits, can even be scaled across different systems.


## Inter-Process Communication

- In modern computing, we often have more than one processes work together to accomplish a single task (or we have multiple tasks being serviced by a single process). Hence arises the need for multiple processes to communicate with each other (if they are working together for a common objective). This is Inter-Process Communication (IPC).
- As inferred by definition, it works for coordinating processes.
- We need IPCs for:
    - Faster computing.
    - Modularity.
    - Information Sharing.
- There are two modes of IPC:
    - **Shared Memory**:
        - The idea is that there would exist a certain area in memory for sharing between interested processes.
        - Generally, the OS doesn't allow sharing of memory between processes. This is to avoid race conditions. So, that restriction needs to be removed for it to work.
        - The process that initiates the communication allots the shared memory space. Other processes who want to join in attach their address spaces for sharing.
        - Since there is always a possibility that both processes might make writes to the shared location at the same time, hence the shared memory is not safe. We employ techniques of synchronization just to avoid this. We do that in ways of *semaphores* and *mutex*.
    - **Message Passing**:
        - The idea of shared memory may not always be possible (safety aside). In distributed systems, there may not be any place for that.
        - Here, processes communicate with each other by means of message passing.
        - If two processes are communicating (say A and B), the common channel is the kernel. For example, A writes to the disk a bit of info. It has to tell it to the kernel so that B can make a succesful read of that from the disk (by retrieving that info from kernel itself).
        - There are several techniques of message passing. We have **direct communication** in which messages are directly sent at once rather than any intermediate queues or buffers. **Indirect communcation** uses a mailbox facility for storing the stream of messages. We can also add an aditional mode of **synchronization** in which ther messages that would pass through and won't are evaluated for decisions and are synced. We can also use **buffered communication** with an intermediary buffer.
- It is worth knowing that there are many other types of system calls. We can also have networking sockets as a mode in which two process may interact.


## Mutex

- In shared memory IPCs, we have two synchronization mechanisms - mutex and semaphores.
- The *critical section* problem states that assuming a system has *n* processes running, each process has a segment of code in which they do a common variable update. This would obviously lead to unexpected race conditions. This critical section problem is what we seek to solve using mutex and semaphores. This is the only risk we have in shared memory IPCs.
- There are certain characteristics of a critical section:
    - Once a process executes its critical section, no other process is allowed to do so. This is to ensure atomic consistency of data. This is called *mutual exclusion*.
    - There should be a *bounded wait* on for a process when it has requested for its critical section entry section and the number of times another process executes its critical section.
    - The part of the code that grants permission for entry into a critical section is called an *entry section*. The code after the critical section is *exit section*.
- A mutex is basically a lock. A process acquires a mutex lock when it executes its critical section and leaves it when it is done. A process trying to access a critical section gets blocked off until the lock is relinquished.
- A mutex lock has a boolean variable (say *available*) that gauges if the critical section is available or not. It has two functionalities - **acquire** and **release** that each process can use to signal that universal *available* variable.
- The greatest con to this problem is the **thread spinlock** or the **thread busy-waiting** problem. When a critical section is occupied, other threads are stuck in a loop constantly checking for the lock to be released. They are wasting their CPU cycles doing nothing. This makes threads totally pointless.
- The greatest pro of this is that there is no need for context-switching (switching the context from one process to another with respect to the process execution) which is a resource-intensive operation.


## Semaphore

- Semaphores offer the utility that mutex offers but it does so in a more sophesticated way.
- They don't have boolean variables, but integer variables. They keep a count of the process. That variable is mutually exclusive in access and hence atomic. There are two operations: **wait** and **signal**.
- Binary semaphores can only acquire 0 and 1 as values. A binary semaphore has the same functionality as a mutex lock. Systems that do not support mutex locks can leverage binary semaphores to achieve the same functionality.
- Counting semaphores range up to infinite numbers from 0. Every process is assigned a count of 1. If it is executing on the same resource, the count goes up. When it is done, the count falls.
- An advantage that it has over mutex is that multiple threads of a process can access the same semaphore simultaneously.


## Interrupts

## Context Switch
